\input texinfo   @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename psgml-api.info
@settitle psgml-api
@c @setchapternewpage odd
@c %**end of header
@c $Id: psgml-api.texi,v 1.2 1999/12/03 17:29:39 lenst Exp $

@ifinfo
@format
START-INFO-DIR-ENTRY
* PSGML-API: (psgml-api).  PSGML, the API documentation.
END-INFO-DIR-ENTRY
@end format
@end ifinfo

@ifinfo
Documentation for PSGML, a major mode for SGML.

Copyright 1994 Lennart Staflin
     
Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim
copies of this manual provided the copyright notice and
this permission notice are preserved on all copies.

@ignore
Permission is granted to process this file through TeX
and print the results, provided the printed document
carries a copying permission notice identical to this
one except for the removal of this paragraph (this
paragraph not being relevant to the printed manual).

@end ignore
Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified
versions of this manual under the conditions for
verbatim copying, and provided that the entire
resulting derived work is distributed under the terms
of a permission notice identical to this one.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute
translations of this manual into another language,
under the above conditions for modified versions,
except that this permission notice may be stated in a
translation approved by the Free Software Foundation.

@end ifinfo

@titlepage

@title Internals of PSGML
@author Lennart Staflin
     
@c  The following two commands
@c  start the copyright page.
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
Copyright @copyright{} 1994 Lennart Staflin

@c Published by ...

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim
copies of this manual provided the copyright notice and
this permission notice are preserved on all copies.

@ignore
Permission is granted to process this file through TeX
and print the results, provided the printed document
carries a copying permission notice identical to this
one except for the removal of this paragraph (this
paragraph not being relevant to the printed manual).

@end ignore
Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified
versions of this manual under the conditions for
verbatim copying, and provided that the entire
resulting derived work is distributed under the terms
of a permission notice identical to this one.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute
translations of this manual into another language,
under the above conditions for modified versions,
except that this permission notice may be stated in a
translation approved by the Free Software Foundation.
@end titlepage

@node Top, Types, (dir), (dir)
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@ifinfo
@top PSGML Internals
@end ifinfo

@menu
* Types::                       Types and operations
* Hooks::                       Hooks
* Implementation::              Implementation notes
* Index::                       Index

 --- The Detailed Node Listing ---

Types and operations

* element::                     The element structure
* attribute::                   Attribute Types
* parser state::                Parser state
* DTD::                         DTD
* entities::                    Entities
@end menu

@node Types, Hooks, Top, Top
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@chapter Types and operations

NOTE:
Names of element types, attributes and entities should be treated as far
as possible as a real type.  In versions prior to 1.0 names are
represented by lisp symbols but in 1.0 they are strings.

Perhaps I should make a @file{psgml-api.el} that defines some functions
to deal with names.  Then it would be possible to write code that works
in both 0.4 and 1.0.


@menu
* element::                     The element structure
* attribute::                   Attribute Types
* parser state::                Parser state
* DTD::                         DTD
* entities::                    Entities
@end menu

@node element, attribute, Types, Types
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section The element structure

@deftp {Data type} element
The basic data type representing the element structure is the Element (this
happens to be a node in the parse tree).
@end deftp


@subsection Mapping buffer positions to elements

@defun sgml-find-context-of pos
Return the element current at buffer position @var{pos}.  If @var{pos}
is in markup, @code{sgml-markup-type} will be a symbol identifying the
markup type.  It will be @code{nil} if @var{pos} is outside markup.
@end defun

@defun sgml-find-element-of pos
Return the element containing the character at buffer position @var{pos}.
@end defun


@subsection Functions operating on elements

@defun sgml-element-name element
Returns the name of the element.  (obsolete) 
@end defun

@defun sgml-element-gi element
Return the general identifier (string) of @var{element}.
@end defun

@defun sgml-element-level element
Returns the level of @var{element} in the element structure.  The
document element is level 1.
@end defun

@subsubsection Structure

@defun sgml-top-element
Return the document element.
@end defun

@defun sgml-off-top-p element
True if @var{element} is the pseudo element above the document element.
@end defun

These functions return other related elements, or possibly @code{nil}.

@defun sgml-element-content element
First element in content of @var{element}, or nil.
@end defun

@defun sgml-element-next element
Next sibling of @var{element}.  To loop thru all sub elements of an
element, @code{el}, You could do like this:

@lisp
(let ((c (sgml-element-content el)))
   (while c
        <<Do something with c>>
        (setq c (sgml-element-next c))))
@end lisp
@end defun

@defun sgml-element-parent element
Parent of @var{element}.
@end defun


@subsubsection Tags

@defun sgml-element-stag-optional element
Return true if the start-tag of @var{element} is omissible.
@end defun

@defun sgml-element-etag-optional element
Return true if the end-tag of @var{element} is omissible.
@end defun

@defun sgml-element-stag-len element
Return the length of the start-tag of @var{element}.  If the start-tag
has been omitted the length is 0.
@end defun

@defun sgml-element-etag-len element
Return the length of the end-tag of @var{element}.  If the end-tag
has been omitted the length is 0.
@end defun

@defun sgml-element-net-enabled element
Return true, if @var{element} or some parent of the element has null end
tag (NET) enabled.  Return @code{t}, if it is @var{element} that has NET
enabled.
@end defun


@subsubsection Positions

These functions relates an element to positions in the buffer.

@defun sgml-element-start element
Position of start of @var{element}.
@end defun

@defun sgml-element-end element
Position after @var{element}.
@end defun

@defun sgml-element-stag-end element
Position after start-tag of @var{element}.
@end defun

@defun sgml-element-etag-start element
Position before end-tag of @var{element}.
@end defun


@subsubsection Attributes

@defun sgml-element-attlist element
Return the attribute declaration list for @var{element}.
@end defun

@defun sgml-element-attribute-specification-list element
Return the attribute specification list for @var{element}.
@end defun

@defun sgml-element-attval element attribute
Return the value of the @var{attribute} in @var{element}, string or nil.
@end defun


@subsubsection Misc technical


@defun sgml-element-data-p element
True if @var{element} can contain data characters.
@end defun

@defun sgml-element-mixed element
True if @var{element} has mixed content.
@end defun

@defun sgml-element-eltype element
@end defun

@defun sgml-element-empty element
True if @var{element} is empty.
@end defun

@defun sgml-element-excludes element
@end defun

@defun sgml-element-includes element
@end defun

@defun sgml-element-model element
Declared content or content model of @var{element}.
@end defun

@defun sgml-element-context-string element
Return string describing context of @var{element}.
@end defun

@c ----------------------------------------------------------------------
@node attribute, parser state, element, Types
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section Attribute Types

Basic types for attributes are names and values.  (See note about names
in @ref{Types}.) And attribute values (attval) by lisp strings.


@subsection Attribute Declaration List Type

@deftp {Data type} attlist attdecl*
This is the result of the ATTLIST declarations in the DTD.
All attribute declarations for an element is the elements
attlist.
@end deftp

@defun sgml-lookup-attdecl name attlist 
Return attribute declaration (attdecl) for attribute @var{name} in
attribute declaration list @var{attlist}.
@end defun

@defun sgml-attribute-with-declared-value attlist declared-value
Find the first attribute in @var{attlist} that has @var{declared-value}.
@end defun


@subsection Attribute Declaration Type 

@deftp {Data type} attdecl name declared-value default-value
This is the representation of an individual attribute declaration
contained in an ATTLIST declaration.
@end deftp

@defun sgml-make-attdecl name declared-value default-value
Produces an attdecl.
@end defun

@defun sgml-attdecl-name attdecl
Returns the name of an attribute declaration.
@end defun

@defun sgml-attdecl-declared-value attdecl
Returns the declared-value of attribute declaration @var{attdecl}.
@end defun

@defun sgml-attdecl-default-value: attdecl
Returns the default-value of attribute declaration @var{attdecl}.
@end defun


@subsection Declared Value Type

@deftp {Data type} declared-value (token-group | notation | simple)
A declared value of an SGML attribute can be of different kinds.  If the
declared value is a token group there is an associated list of name
tokens.  For notation there is also a list of associated names, the
allowed notation names.  The other declared values are represented by the
type name as a lisp symbol.
@c token-group = nametoken+
@c notation = nametoken+
@c simple = symbol
@end deftp

@defun sgml-declared-value-token-group declared-value
Return the name token group for the @var{declared-value}.
This applies to name token groups.  For other declared values nil is
returned.
@end defun

@defun sgml-declared-value-notation declared-value
Return the list of notation names for the @var{declared-value}.
This applies to notation declared value.  For other declared values
nil is returned.
@end defun


@subsection Default Value Type

@deftp {Data type} default-value (required | implied | conref | specified )
@c implied, conref = constant symbol
@c specified = (fixed | normal)
@c fixed, normal = attval
There are several kinds of default values.  The @var{required},
@var{implied}, and @var{conref} has no associated information.  The
@var{specified} have an associated attribute value and can be either
@code{fixed} or @code{normal}.
@end deftp

@defun sgml-make-default-value type &optional attval
@end defun

@defun sgml-default-value-attval default-value 
Return the actual default value of the declared @var{default-value}.
The actual value is a string. Return @code{nil} if no actual value.
@end defun

@defun sgml-default-value-type-p type default-value
Return true if @var{default-value} is of @var{type}.  Where @var{type}
is a symbol, one of @code{required}, @code{implied}, @code{conref}, or
@code{fixed}.
@end defun


@subsection Attribute Specification Type

@deftp {Data type} attspec name attval
This is the result of parsing an attribute specification.
@end deftp

@defun sgml-make-attspec name attval
Create an attspec from @var{name} and @var{attval}.
Special case, if @var{attval} is @code{nil} this is an implied attribute.
@end defun

@defun sgml-attspec-name attspec
Return the name of the attribute specified by @var{attspec}.
@end defun

@defun sgml-attspec-attval attspec
Return the value (attval) of attribute specification @var{attspec}.
If @var{attspec} is @code{nil}, @code{nil} is returned.
@end defun


@subsection Attribute Specification List Type

@deftp {Data type} asl attspec*
This is the result of parsing an attribute specification list.
@end deftp

@defun sgml-lookup-attspec name asl
Return the attribute specification for attribute with @var{name} in the
attribute specification list @var{asl}.  If the attribute is unspecified
@code{nil} is returned.
@end defun



@c ------------------------------------------------------------------
@node  parser state, DTD, attribute, Types
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section Parser state

The state of the parser that needs to be kept between commands are
stored in a buffer local variable.  Some global variables are
initialised from this variable when parsing starts.

@defvar sgml-buffer-parse-state
The state of the parser that is kept between commands.  The value of
this variable is of type pstate.
@end defvar

@deftp {Data type} pstate
The parser state.
@end deftp

@defun sgml-pstate-dtd pstate
The document type information (dtd) for the parser.
@end defun


@c ------------------------------------------------------------------
@node  DTD, entities, parser state, Types
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section DTD

@deftp {Data type} dtd
Represents what PSGML knows about the DTD.
@end deftp

@defun sgml-dtd-doctype dtd
The document type name.
@end defun

@defun sgml-dtd-eltypes dtd
The table of element types.
@end defun

@defun sgml-dtd-entities dtd
The table of declared general entities (entity-table).
@end defun

@defun sgml-dtd-parameters dtd
The table of declared parameter entities (entity-table).
@end defun

@defun sgml-dtd-shortmaps dtd
The list of short reference maps.
@end defun

@defun sgml-dtd-notations dtd
Not yet implemented.
@end defun



@c ------------------------------------------------------------------
@node  entities,  , DTD, Types
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section Entities

@deftp {Data type} entity
An entity has the following properties: 

@table @var
@item name
The name of the entity (a string).  This is either the name of a
declared entity (general or parameter) or the doctype name if it is the
implicit entity referred to by the doctype declaration.

@item type
This is a symbol.  It is @code{text} if it is a text entity, other
values are @code{cdata}, @code{ndata}, @code{sdata}, @code{sgml} or
@code{dtd}.

@item text
This is the text of the entity, either a string or an external
identifier.
@end table
@end deftp

Operations on entities

@defun sgml-make-entity name type text
Create an entity.
@end defun

@defun sgml-entity-name entity
The name of the entity.
@end defun

@defun sgml-entity-type entity
The type of the entity.
@end defun

@defun sgml-entity-text entity
The text of the entity.
@end defun

@defun sgml-entity-insert-text entity
Insert the text of the entity into the current buffer at point.
@end defun

@defun sgml-entity-data-p entity
True if @var{entity} is a data entity, that is not of type @code{text}.
@end defun


@deftp {Data type} entity-table
A table of entities that can be referenced by entity name.
@end deftp

@defun sgml-lookup-entity name entity-table
The entity with named @var{name} in the table @var{entity-table}.  If no
such entity exists, @code{nil} is returned.
@end defun

@defun sgml-entity-declare name entity-table type text
Create an entity from @var{name}, @var{type} and @var{text}; and enter
the entity into the table @var{entity-table}.
@end defun

@defun sgml-entity-completion-table entity-table
Make a completion table from the @var{entity-table}.
@end defun

@defun sgml-map-entities fn entity-table &optional collect
Apply the function @var{fn} to all entities in @var{entity-table}.  If
@var{collect} is @code{t}, the results of the applications are collected
in a list and returned.
@end defun



@c ------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Hooks, Implementation, Types, Top
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@chapter Hooks

@defvar sgml-open-element-hook
The hook run by @code{sgml-open-element}.
Theses functions are called with two arguments, the first argument is
the opened element and the second argument is the attribute specification
list.  It is probably best not to refer to the content or the end-tag of 
the element.
@end defvar

@defvar sgml-close-element-hook
The hook run by @code{sgml-close-element}.  These functions are invoked
with @code{sgml-current-tree} bound to the element just parsed.
@end defvar

@defvar sgml-doctype-parsed-hook
This hook is called after the doctype has been parsed.
It can be used to load any additional information into the DTD structure.
@end defvar

@defvar sgml-sysid-resolve-functions
This variable should contain a list of functions.
Each function should take one argument, the system identifier of an entity.
If the function can handle that identifier, it should insert the text
of the entity into the current buffer at point and return t.  If the
system identifier is not handled the function should return nil.
@end defvar

@defvar sgml-doctype-parsed-hook
This hook is caled after the doctype has been parsed.
It can be used to load any additional information into the DTD structure.
@end defvar

@defvar sgml-close-element-hook
@c ***
The hook run by `sgml-close-element'.
These functions are invoked with `sgml-current-tree' bound to the
element just parsed.
@end defvar

*** sgml-new-attribute-list-function
This hook is run when a new element is inserted to construct the
attribute specification list. The default function prompts for the
required attributes.


@c ------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Implementation, Index, Hooks, Top
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@chapter Implementation notes

@section Data Types and Operations

@subsection Element Type

@deftp {Data type} eltype
Data type representing the information about an element type.  An
@code{eltype} has information from @samp{ELEMENT} and @samp{ATTLIST}
declarations.  It can also store data for the application.
@end deftp

The element types are symbols in a special oblist.  The oblist is the
table of element types.  The symbols name is the GI, its value is used
to store three flags and the function definition holds the content
model.  Other information about the element type is stored on the
property list.

@defun sgml-eltype-name et
The name (a string) of the element type @var{et}.
@end defun

@defun sgml-eltype-appdata et prop
Get application data from element type @var{et} with name @var{prop}.
@var{prop} should be a symbol, reserved names are: flags, model, attlist,
includes, excludes, conref-regexp, mixed, stag-optional, etag-optional.

This function can be used as a place in @code{setf}, @code{push} and
other functions from the CL library.
@end defun

@defun sgml-eltype-all-miscdata eltype
A list of all data properties for eltype except for flags, model,
includes and excludes.  This function filters the property list of
@var{eltype}.  Used when saving the parsed DTD.
@end defun

@defun sgml-eltype-set-all-miscdata eltype miscdata
Append the @var{miscdata} data properties to the properties of
@var{eltype}.
@end defun

@defun sgml-eltype-attlist et
The attribute specification list for the element type @var{et}.
@end defun

@defun sgml-eltype-completion-table eltypes
Make a completion table from a list, @var{eltypes}, of element types.
@end defun

@defun sgml-eltype-stag-optional et
True if the element type @var{et} has optional start-tag.
@end defun

@defun sgml-eltype-etag-optional et
True if the element type @var{et} has optional end-tag.
@end defun

@defun sgml-eltype-excludes et
The list of excluded element types for element type @var{et}.
@end defun

@defun sgml-eltype-includes et
The list of included element types for element type @var{et}.
@end defun

@defun sgml-eltype-flags et
Contains three flags as a number.  The flags are stag-optional,
etag-optional and mixed.
@end defun

@defun sgml-eltype-mixed et
True if element type @var{et} has mixed content.
@end defun

@defun sgml-eltype-model et
The content model of element type @var{et}.  The content model is either
the start state in the DFA for the content model or a symbol identifying
a declared content.
@end defun

@defun sgml-eltype-shortmap et
The name of the shortmap associated with element type @var{et}.  This
can also be the symbol @code{empty} (if declared with a @samp{<!USEMAP
gi #EMPTY>} or @code{nil} (if no associated map).
@end defun


@defun sgml-eltype-token et
Return a token for the element type @var{et}.
@end defun

@defun sgml-eltypes-in-state state tree
List of element types valid in @var{state} and @var{tree}.
@end defun


@subsection DTD

The DTD data type is realised as a lisp vector using @code{defstruct}.

There are two additional fields for internal use: dependencies and
merged.

@defun sgml-dtd-dependencies dtd
The list of files used to create this DTD.
@end defun

@defun sgml-dtd-merged dtd
The pair (@var{file} . @var{merged-dtd}), if the DTD has had a
precompiled dtd merged into it.  @var{File} is the file containing the
compiled DTD and @var{merged-dtd} is the DTD loaded from that file.
@end defun


@subsection Element and Tree

@deftp {Data Type} tree
This is the data type for the nodes in the tree build by the parser. 
@end deftp

The tree nodes are represented as lisp vectors, using @code{defstruct}
to define basic operations. 

The Element data type is a view of the tree built by the parser.


@section Parsing model

PSGML uses finite state machines and a stack to parse SGML.  Every
element type has an associated DFA (deterministic finite automaton).
This DFA is constructed from the content model.

SGML restricts the allowed content models in such a way that it is
easy to directly construct a DFA.

To be able to determine when a start-tag can be omitted the DFA need to
contain some more information than the traditional DFA.  In PSGML a DFA
has a set of states and two sets of edges.  The edges are associated
with tokens (corresponding to SGML's primitive content tokens).  I call
these moves.  One set of moves, the @dfn{optional moves}, represents
optional tokens.  I call the other set @dfn{required moves}.  The
correspondence to SGML definitions are: if there is precisely one
required move from one state, then the associated token is required.
A state is final if there is not required move from that state.

The SGML construct @samp{(...&...&...)} (@dfn{AND-group}) is another
problem.  There is a simple translation to sequence- and or-connectors.
For example @samp{(a & b & c)} is can be translated to:

@example
((a, ((c, b) | (b, c))) | 
 (b, ((a, c) | (c, a))) | 
 (c, ((a, b) | (b, a))) )
@end example

But this grows too fast to be of direct practical use.  PSGML represents
an AND-group with one DFA for every (SGML) token in the group.  During
parsing of an AND-group there is a pointer to a state in one of the
group's DFAs, and a list of the DFAs for the tokens not yet satisfied.
Most of this is hidden by the primitives for the state type.  The parser
only sees states in a DFA and moves.


@section Entity manager

@defun sgml-push-to-entity entity &optional ref-start type
Set current buffer to a buffer containing the entity @var{entity}.
@var{entity} can also be a file name. Optional argument @var{ref-start}
should be the start point of the entity reference. Optional argument
@var{type}, overrides the entity type in entity look up.
@end defun


@defun sgml-pop-entity
Should be called after a @code{sgml-push-to-entity} (or similar).
Restore the current buffer to the buffer that was current when the push
to this buffer was made.
@end defun

@defun sgml-push-to-string string
Create an entity from @var{string} and push it on the top of the entity
stack. After this the current buffer will be a scratch buffer containing
the text of the new entity with point at the first character.

Use @code{sgml-pop-entity} to exit from this buffer.
@end defun


@c @section Lexical

@section Parser functions

@defun sgml-need-dtd
This makes sure that the buffer has a DTD and set global variables
needed by parsing routines. One global variable is @code{sgml-dtd-info}
which contain the DTD (type dtd).
@end defun


@defun sgml-parse-to goal &optional extra-cond quiet
This is the low level interface to the parser.

Parse until (at least) @var{goal}, a buffer position. Optional argument
@var{extra-cond} should be a function. This function is called in the
parser loop, and the loop is exited if the function returns t. If third
argument @var{quit} is non-@code{nil}, no "@samp{Parsing...}" message
will be displayed.
@end defun


@defun sgml-reparse-buffer shortref-fun
Reparse the buffer and let @var{shortref-fun} take care of short 
references.  @var{shortref-fun} is called with the entity as 
argument and @code{sgml-markup-start} pointing to start of short 
reference and point pointing to the end.
@end defun


@section Saved DTD Format
@format
File =         Comment,
               File version,
               S-expression --dependencies--,
               Parameter entites,
               Document type name,
               Elements,
               General entities,
               S-expression --shortref maps--,
               S-expression --notations--

Elements =     Counted Sequence of S-expression --element type name--,
               Counted Sequence of Element type description

File version = "(sgml-saved-dtd-version 5)
"

Comment =      (";",
                (CASE
                  OF [0-9]
                  OF [11-255])*,
                [10] --end of line marker--)*

Element type description = S-expression --Misc info--,
               CASE
                OF [0-7] --Flags 1:stag-opt, 2:etag-opt, 4:mixed--,
                    Content specification,
                    Token list --includes--,
                    Token list --excludes--
                OF [128] --Flag undefined element--

Content specification = CASE
                OF [0] --cdata--
                OF [1] --rcdata--
                OF [2] --empty--
                OF [3] --any--
                OF [4] --undefined--
                OF [128] --model follows--,
                    Model --nodes in the finite state automaton--

Model =        Counted Sequence of Node

Node =         CASE
                OF Normal State
                OF And Node

Normal State = Moves --moves for optional tokens--,
               Moves --moves for required tokens--

Moves =        Counted Sequence of (Token,
                    OCTET --state #--)

And Node =     [255] --signals an AND node--,
               Number --next state (node number)--,
               Counted Sequence of Model --set of models--

Token =        Number --index in list of elements--

Number =       CASE
                OF [0-250] --Small number 0--250--
                OF [251-255] --Big number, first octet--,
                    OCTET --Big number, second octet--

Token list =   Counted Sequence of Token

Parameter entites = S-expression --internal representation of parameter entities--

General entities = S-expression --internal representation of general entities--

Document type name = S-expression --name of document type as a string--

S-expression = OTHER

Counted Sequence = Number_a --length of sequence--,
               (ARG_1)^a


@end format



@c ------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Index,  , Implementation, Top
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@chapter Index

Types
@printindex tp

@bye
